---
layout: post
title: "Fragmentation in the Ruby Community"
---

I recently spoke on a [legacy rails
panel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=csiK5GCcjt8) at Wroclove.rb.
You should watch the video if you haven't, there is a lot of good
stuff in there. Speaking on the panel publicized  own
personal opinions. It was cathartic in a way and it felt great. In
hindsight I realized I've been thinking about this post for much
longer than I thought. The recent TDD (is dead) discussion is bringing
more thoughts to light.

The Ruby community is fragmenting. The community needs new leadership.

The TDD discussion exemplifies one fault lines: Rails. This has been
going on for years now, but I think the gap is widening more quickly
in recent years. I wrote [moving on from
Rails](http://hawkins.io/2011/11/moving_on_from_rails/) in 2011. It's
more relevant than ever. There is a growing portion of the community
that has zero interest in Rails. It is awesome to meet more and more
of these people. There are people who live and breathe Rails and the
"Rails Way". In my experience you either buy into the Rails Way or you
don't. I haven't found a middle ground. There are members of the Ruby
community who work and ship plenty of code doing TDD, applying
patterns, and using other system architectures. There are people who
care passionately about these things and know they're important. This
is visible in people's personal descriptions: "Rails Developer" or
"Ruby Developer". There is a key difference.

I do not want to see an entire language ecosystem driven by the head
of a web framework. I don't usually say good things about Javascript,
but I envy their diversity. The language is used in so many places now
that there simply more smart people involved. There are the browser
framework guys and there is all a bunch of Node community leaders.
The Ruby community does not have that. We one person with his own
conference and almost religious following. There are Ruby developers
in the community that I respect, but it seems like a loose coalition
rather than a figurehead. I'd like to see the new leaders with wider
experience who focus on Ruby itself and not a single use case. Perhaps
those of us with experience just need to be more vocal. Hopefully we
can change the community's direction.
